DEVPROD-25596: Documenting all Cost calculations for Cost Project (#10051)
evergreen-ci/evergreen: docs/FAQ/Cost-FAQ.md

# Cost FAQ

## What cost fields does Evergreen track for a task?

Each task tracks the following cost components:

- **EC2 on-demand cost**: The runtime cost of the instance at AWS list price.

> - **EC2 adjusted cost**: The runtime cost using the finance formula, which blends the savings plan rate and on-demand rate. This is the figure used for internal cost attribution.

Author: Addressed!

- **S3 Artifact PUT Cost**: The cost of S3 PUT API requests made when uploading user artifacts via `s3.put` commands.
- **S3 Log PUT Cost**: The cost of S3 PUT API requests made when uploading task log chunks.
- **S3 Artifact Storage Cost**: The cost of storing uploaded artifact bytes over their retention period, calculated using S3 Intelligent Tiering pricing.
- **S3 Log Storage Cost**: The cost of storing uploaded log bytes over their retention period, calculated using S3 Intelligent Tiering pricing.

These costs roll up to the version level when the version finishes.

## How is the EC2 cost calculated?

EC2 costs are calculated when a task finishes, using the task's actual runtime and the distro's pricing data.

The **on-demand cost** uses the AWS list price for the distro:

```text
on_demand_cost = runtime_seconds * (on_demand_rate / 3600) * (1 - on_demand_discount)
```

The **adjusted cost** blends the savings plan rate and on-demand rate using the finance formula:

```text
adjusted_cost = runtime_seconds * (finance_formula * savings_plan_rate + (1 - finance_formula) * on_demand_rate) / 3600
```

> Both discount values and the finance formula are configured in the `cost` section of the Evergreen admin settings.

Reviewer: BizOps team -> Financial Planning and Analysis (FP&A) team

No wiki link available for that team

    + (days_in_ia       * 0.0125 * (1 - i_a_storage_cost_discount)      / GB / 30)
    + (days_in_archive  * 0.004  * (1 - archive_storage_cost_discount)   / GB / 30)
```

## How is the S3 log storage cost calculated?

S3 Log Storage Cost uses the same Intelligent Tiering pricing model and formula as S3 Artifact Storage Cost, applied to the log bytes uploaded and the log bucket's lifecycle rule retention period.

```text
s3_log_storage_cost = log_upload_bytes
    * (days_in_standard * 0.023  * (1 - standard_storage_cost_discount) / GB / 30)
    + (days_in_ia       * 0.0125 * (1 - i_a_storage_cost_discount)      / GB / 30)
    + (days_in_archive  * 0.004  * (1 - archive_storage_cost_discount)   / GB / 30)
```

## How can I view cost data via the REST API?

Cost fields are returned on the task and version endpoints.

**Task** — returns `task_cost`, `predicted_task_cost`, and `s3_usage`:

```text
GET https://evergreen.mongodb.com/rest/v2/tasks/{task_id}
```

**Version** — returns `cost` (aggregated actuals) and `predicted_cost` across all tasks in the version:

```text
GET https://evergreen.mongodb.com/rest/v2/versions/{version_id}
```

> Both endpoints require authentication via `Api-User` and `Api-Key` headers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Additionally, S3 PUT costs are only calculated if the task uploaded files. S3 artifact storage cost requires that the task's artifacts have a resolvable lifecycle rule or a configured `default_max_artifact_expiration_days` fallback.

## How are cost discounts configured?

Cost discounts are configured by Evergreen admins in the `cost` section of the admin settings. The following discounts are available:

- `upload_cost_discount`: Applied to all S3 PUT costs (artifacts and logs).
- `standard_storage_cost_discount`: Applied to S3 Standard tier storage costs.
- `i_a_storage_cost_discount`: Applied to S3 Infrequent Access tier storage costs.
- `archive_storage_cost_discount`: Applied to S3 Archive tier storage costs.
- `ebs_discount`: Applied to EBS GP3 throughput costs.
- `savings_plan_discount`: Applied to the savings plan component of EC2 adjusted cost.
- `on_demand_discount`: Applied to the on-demand component of EC2 on-demand and adjusted cost.

> All discounts are values between 0.0 (no discount) and 1.0 (100% discount).

Author: Addressed

# Cost FAQ

Evergreen tracks the infrastructure cost of every task across three categories:

> - **EC2** — the virtual machine that runs the task. Cost is based on instance type and how long the task runs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **EC2** — the machine that runs the task. Cost is based on instance type and how long the task runs.
```
(because I'm not sure if all static hosts are virtual machines.)

- **EBS** — the disk attached to the EC2 instance. GP3 volumes can be provisioned with higher throughput than the 125 MB/s free tier; the throughput cost above that baseline and the storage cost for the volume are both tracked.
- **S3** — object storage where task artifacts and logs are uploaded. Both the upload requests (PUT costs) and the ongoing storage are tracked.

> All costs displayed in Evergreen have applicable discounts applied. Discount rates are configured by the [BizOps team](https://wiki.corp.mongodb.com/spaces/ADS/pages/143691615/Business+Operations+Team+BizOps) and set in Evergreen's admin settings. Non-discounted list-price values are also available for each cost field via the REST API — see [How can I view cost data via the REST API?](#how-can-i-view-cost-data-via-the-rest-api).

Reviewer 2: We only have them in honeycomb, not the api.

## What cost fields does Evergreen track?

> Cost is tracked at the task level and rolls up to the version and patch level once all tasks finish.

Reviewer 2: `once all tasks finish`
This is not fully accurate because they get added as tasks run

**Task-level fields:**

| Category | Description                                                         |
| -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| EC2      | Runtime cost with discounts applied                                 |
| EBS      | Throughput cost above the 125 MB/s free tier, with discount applied |
| EBS      | Storage cost for the attached volume, with discount applied         |
| S3       | PUT request cost for uploading user artifacts                       |
| S3       | Storage cost for uploaded artifacts over their retention period     |
| S3       | PUT request cost for uploading task log chunks                      |

> | S3       | Storage cost for uploaded logs over their retention period          |

Reviewer 2: This would potentially be clearer if it also had a column for the sub category, like s3 log storage, s3 artifact storage, etc.

All values reflect discounted costs. For field names, non-discounted list-price equivalents, and the full cost breakdown, see [How can I view cost data via the REST API?](#how-can-i-view-cost-data-via-the-rest-api).

**Version-level fields:**

> The version aggregates costs across all its tasks once they finish. For patch-triggered versions (such as PR patches), child patches run as separate versions and their costs are included in the parent version's cost total.

Reviewer 2: This is not fully accurate because child patch costs are never shown on the version level (via the api) even if they exist

> A predicted cost estimate is also available on the task, version, and patch while tasks are still running — see [How is predicted cost calculated?](#how-is-predicted-cost-calculated).

Reviewer 2: At the time when this will be merged this will not yet be true via the UI, only the API

## How is EC2 cost calculated?

> EC2 is the virtual machine that runs the task. The cost is calculated when the task finishes, using the task's actual runtime and the distro's pricing data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
EC2 is the machine that runs the task. The cost is calculated when the task finishes, using the task's actual runtime and the distro's pricing data.
```

> The discounted cost blends MongoDB's AWS savings plan rate and the standard on-demand rate using a weighting factor:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The discounted cost a savings plan rate and the standard on-demand rate using a weighting factor:
```

```text
adjusted_cost = runtime_seconds * (finance_formula * savings_plan_rate + (1 - finance_formula) * on_demand_rate) / 3600
                                                                                                                   ^ EC2 rates are per-hour; divides to get per-second cost
```

> `finance_formula` is a ratio between 0 and 1 that controls how much of the cost is attributed to MongoDB's savings plan coverage versus the standard AWS list price. The savings plan rate and `finance_formula` are provided by the [BizOps team](https://wiki.corp.mongodb.com/spaces/ADS/pages/143691615/Business+Operations+Team+BizOps). The on-demand rate is the standard AWS list price for the instance type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`finance_formula` is a ratio between 0 and 1 that controls how much of the cost is attributed to MongoDB's savings plan coverage versus the standard AWS list price. The savings plan rate and `finance_formula` are provided by the Financial Planning and Analysis (FP&A) team. The on-demand rate is the standard AWS list price for the instance type.
```
This has changed and unfortunately there isn't a wiki we can link

## How is EBS cost calculated?

EBS is the disk attached to the EC2 instance. Two components are tracked: throughput cost and storage cost. Both use us-east-1 rates regardless of where the task runs and are calculated when the task finishes.

### EBS throughput cost

GP3 volumes can be provisioned with higher throughput than the 125 MB/s AWS free tier. Only the throughput above that baseline is billable. If a distro has no GP3 mount points, or all volumes are at or below 125 MB/s, the throughput cost is zero.

```text
billable_throughput = total_gp3_throughput_MBps - 125
adjusted_ebs_throughput_cost = (billable_throughput * 0.04 / 2_592_000) * runtime_seconds * (1 - ebs_discount)

>                                                           ^ seconds in a 30-day month

Reviewer 2: for clarity I think it would be okay to use `seconds in a 30-day month` directly in the formula

```

### EBS storage cost

> Storage cost is based on the total size of all attached volumes, prorated to the task's actual runtime. If a distro has no mount points, the storage cost is zero.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Storage cost is based on the total size of all attached volumes, prorated to the task's actual runtime.
```

```text
adjusted_ebs_storage_cost = (volume_size_GB * 0.08 / 2_592_000) * runtime_seconds * (1 - ebs_discount)

>                                                     ^ seconds in a 30-day month

Reviewer 2: Same thought as above about using `seconds in a 30-day month` directly

```

> The EBS discount rate applies to both throughput and storage and is provided by the [BizOps team](https://wiki.corp.mongodb.com/spaces/ADS/pages/143691615/Business+Operations+Team+BizOps).

Reviewer 2: and is provided by the [BizOps team]

Instead of adding this everywhere, can we instead add a note once at the top saying that all forumlas and discount rates are owned by them?

## How is S3 cost calculated?

S3 is the object storage where task artifacts and logs are uploaded. Two types of cost are tracked: PUT request costs (charged per upload request) and storage costs (charged for how long the data is retained).

### Artifact PUT cost

> Every S3 upload generates one or more PUT API requests depending on file size. Evergreen counts these requests and multiplies by the AWS S3 PUT price ($0.000005 per request), then applies an upload discount. PUT costs are calculated at the time of upload.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every S3 upload generates one or more PUT API requests depending on file size. Evergreen counts these requests and multiplies them by the AWS S3 PUT price, then applies an upload discount. PUT costs are calculated at the time of upload.
```

The number of PUT requests per file:

- Files under 5 MB: 1 PUT request.
- Files 5 MB and over: 1 (initiate) + number of 5 MB parts + 1 (complete). For example, a 12 MB file uses 5 PUT requests (1 initiate + 3 parts + 1 complete).

```text

> adjusted_s3_artifact_put_cost = artifact_put_requests * 0.000005 * (1 - upload_cost_discount)

Reviewer 2: Can we write out what  0.000005 is instead of the value?

```

The upload discount is provided by the [BizOps team](https://wiki.corp.mongodb.com/spaces/ADS/pages/143691615/Business+Operations+Team+BizOps).

### Artifact storage cost

Storage cost uses S3 Intelligent Tiering pricing, which transitions objects through three tiers based on their retention period. Storage cost is calculated when the task finishes, using the bucket's lifecycle rule to determine how long the artifacts will be retained.

| Tier              | Days  | Price per GB-month |
| ----------------- | ----- | ------------------ |
| Standard          | 0–30  | $0.023             |
| Infrequent Access | 30–90 | $0.0125            |
| Archive           | 90+   | $0.004             |

> 

Reviewer 2: I discussed this with @sblevine-mongodb and he suggested using `access patterns` here instead and add  the note at the bottom. 
```suggestion
Storage cost uses S3 Intelligent Tiering pricing, which transitions objects through three tiers based on their access patterns. Storage cost is calculated when the task finishes, using the bucket's lifecycle rule to determine how long the artifacts will be retained. To simplify the cost calculations, Evergreen starts counting tier days from the day the objects are uploaded.

| Tier              | Days  | Price per GB-month |
| ----------------- | ----- | ------------------ |
| Standard          | 0–30  | $0.023             |
| Infrequent Access | 30–90 | $0.0125            |
| Archive           | 90+   | $0.004             |

```

also, let's not use "artifacts" here since this applies to both logs and artifacts and it can be confusing here.

> The retention period is read from the bucket's S3 lifecycle rule (when possible). An S3 lifecycle rule is an AWS policy that defines how long objects are retained before being deleted or transitioned to a cheaper storage tier. If no lifecycle rule is found, the `default_max_artifact_expiration_days` admin setting is used as a fallback — this is a global default configured by the Evergreen admin team. If neither is available, storage cost is not calculated. Discount rates for each storage tier are provided by the [BizOps team](https://wiki.corp.mongodb.com/spaces/ADS/pages/143691615/Business+Operations+Team+BizOps).

Reviewer 2: `or transitioned to a cheaper storage tier` We don't use this from the lifecycle rules so mentioning it might be confusing. Can we rephrase this to only focus on the expiration rule?

```text
days_in_standard = min(expiration_days, 30)
days_in_ia       = max(0, min(expiration_days, 90) - 30)
days_in_archive  = max(0, expiration_days - 90)

adjusted_s3_artifact_storage_cost = upload_bytes / GB / 30
    * (days_in_standard * 0.023  * (1 - standard_storage_cost_discount))
    + (days_in_ia       * 0.0125 * (1 - i_a_storage_cost_discount))
    + (days_in_archive  * 0.004  * (1 - archive_storage_cost_discount))
```

> `upload_bytes / GB` converts bytes to gigabytes; `/ 30` converts the per-month tier price to a per-day rate.

Reviewer 2: Can we instead be more explicit in the formula instead?

### Log PUT cost

Task logs are uploaded to S3 in chunks as the task runs; each chunk uses a single PUT request. The cost uses the same rate and discount as artifact PUT costs and is calculated as logs are uploaded.

```text

> adjusted_s3_log_put_cost = log_put_requests * 0.000005 * (1 - upload_cost_discount)

Reviewer 2: Can we write out what  0.000005 is instead of the value?

```

### Log storage cost

> Task logs are stored in a separate S3 bucket from artifacts. Log storage uses the same Intelligent Tiering formula as artifact storage, applied to the uploaded log bytes and the log bucket's lifecycle rule. Log storage cost is calculated when the task finishes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Log storage uses the same Intelligent Tiering formula as artifact storage, applied to the uploaded log bytes and the log bucket's lifecycle rule. Log storage cost is calculated when the task finishes.
```

### When are S3 costs calculated?

> Artifact PUT costs are only calculated if the task uploaded files via `s3.put`. Log PUT costs are incurred whenever a task produces logs. S3 storage costs require either a resolvable lifecycle rule for the bucket or a configured `default_max_artifact_expiration_days` admin setting. If neither is available, storage cost is not calculated.

Reviewer 2: ```
or a configured `default_max_artifact_expiration_days` admin setting
```
We should frame this more from the user's perspective because it's our job to make sure that it's configured by the time this is published. 

We should also add a note about only calculating costs for Devprod Owned buckets.

## How is predicted cost calculated?

> Predicted cost is an estimate of the total task cost before a task finishes, covering all cost categories (EC2, EBS, and S3). It is computed by averaging the actual costs for the same task — by name, project, and build variant — over the past week. If no matching task history exists within the past week, predicted cost is not available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Predicted cost is an estimate of what the cost will be for a task covering all cost categories (EC2, EBS, and S3). It is computed by averaging the historical costs for the same task — by name, project, and build variant — over the past week. If no matching task history exists within the past week, predicted cost is not available.
```

> Predicted cost is available on the task, version, and patch endpoints while tasks are running. On a version or patch, it represents the sum of predicted costs across all tasks. On a patch, it also includes predicted costs from child patches.

Reviewer 2: they are always available on the endpont, not only while they are running

> Predicted cost is available on the task, version, and patch endpoints while tasks are running. On a version or patch, it represents the sum of predicted costs across all tasks. On a patch, it also includes predicted costs from child patches.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Predicted cost is available on the task, version, and patch endpoints while tasks are running. On a version or patch, it represents the sum of predicted costs across all tasks. On patches, it also includes predicted costs for child patches.
```

Once tasks finish, the actual cost is calculated and stored separately. Predicted cost is not updated after tasks complete — it always reflects the pre-run estimate, not the final actual total.

## How can I view cost data via the REST API?

Cost fields are returned on the task, version, and patch endpoints. For full authentication and usage details, see the [REST API documentation](../API/REST-V2-Usage).

> Discounted fields are prefixed `adjusted_` and non-discounted list-price fields are prefixed `on_demand_` (for example, `adjusted_ec2_cost` and `on_demand_ec2_cost`).

Reviewer 2: on_demand_ fields are only available in honeycomb

> **Task** — returns `task_cost` (discounted costs broken down by category) and `predicted_task_cost`. Also returns `s3_usage`, which contains the raw S3 upload metrics (PUT request counts and upload bytes) that Evergreen uses as inputs to calculate the S3 cost components in `task_cost`.

Reviewer 2: ```
Also returns `s3_usage`, which contains the raw S3 upload metrics (PUT request counts and upload bytes) that Evergreen uses as inputs to calculate the S3 cost components in `task_cost`.
```
"Also returns" can use some polish for flow

> **Task** — returns `task_cost` (discounted costs broken down by category) and `predicted_task_cost`. Also returns `s3_usage`, which contains the raw S3 upload metrics (PUT request counts and upload bytes) that Evergreen uses as inputs to calculate the S3 cost components in `task_cost`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Task** — returns `task_cost` (discounted costs broken down by category) and `predicted_task_cost`. Also returns `s3_usage`, which contains the raw S3 upload metrics (PUT request counts and upload bytes) that Evergreen uses to calculate the S3 cost components in `task_cost`.
```

```text
GET https://evergreen.mongodb.com/rest/v2/tasks/{task_id}
```

> **Version** — returns `cost` (aggregated discounted cost across all tasks, including child patch costs), `predicted_cost`, and `s3_usage` (aggregated artifact and log upload metrics across all tasks). `cost` is only populated once all tasks have finished running.

Reviewer 2: `including child patch costs`

This is not accurate, it won't be returned for the version api, only the patch api even if it exists

```text
GET https://evergreen.mongodb.com/rest/v2/versions/{version_id}
```

> **Patch** — returns `cost` (aggregated discounted cost including child patch costs), `predicted_cost` (including child patch predicted costs), and `s3_usage` (aggregated artifact and log upload metrics). The `cost` object also includes `child_patches_total_cost`, which breaks out how much of the total came from child patches versus the parent — use this endpoint when you need that breakdown. The [patch](../Reference/Glossary#patch-build) ID and version ID are the same value — both endpoints accept the same ID and return the same cost total.

Reviewer 2: Should we add a note that s3_usage doesn't include child patch s3 usage?

> **Patch** — returns `cost` (aggregated discounted cost including child patch costs), `predicted_cost` (including child patch predicted costs), and `s3_usage` (aggregated artifact and log upload metrics). The `cost` object also includes `child_patches_total_cost`, which breaks out how much of the total came from child patches versus the parent — use this endpoint when you need that breakdown. The [patch](../Reference/Glossary#patch-build) ID and version ID are the same value — both endpoints accept the same ID and return the same cost total.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Patch** — returns `cost` (aggregated discounted cost including child patch costs), `predicted_cost` (including child patch predicted costs), and `s3_usage` (aggregated artifact and log upload metrics). The `cost` object also includes `child_patches_total_cost`, which breaks out how much of the total came from child patches versus the parent. The [patch](../Reference/Glossary#patch-build).
```

```text
GET https://evergreen.mongodb.com/rest/v2/patches/{patch_id}
```

> All endpoints require authentication. For full details, see the [REST API documentation](../API/REST-V2-Usage).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
(I believe we already linked authentication information above)

# Cost FAQ

Evergreen tracks the infrastructure cost of every task across three categories:

- **EC2** — the machine that runs the task. Cost is based on instance type and how long the task runs.
- **EBS** — the disk attached to the EC2 instance. GP3 volumes can be provisioned with higher throughput than the 125 MB/s free tier; the throughput cost above that baseline and the storage cost for the volume are both tracked.
- **S3** — object storage where task artifacts and logs are uploaded. Both the upload requests (PUT costs) and the ongoing storage are tracked.

> All costs displayed in Evergreen have applicable discounts applied. Discount rates, the finance formula, and other cost parameters are maintained by the Financial Planning and Analysis (FP&A) team and configured in Evergreen's admin settings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All costs displayed in Evergreen have applicable discounts applied. Discount rates, the finance formula, and other cost parameters are owned by the Financial Planning and Analysis (FP&A) team.
```

Cost information is shown on the task, version, and patch pages in the Evergreen UI.

> - While a task is running, a predicted cost is shown; once it completes, the actual cost is shown.

Reviewer 2: this is not true yet and needs to be phrased as coming soon. This will also not be purely on the task level, when available it'll be on the version level too.

> - On version and patch pages, a running total of costs from completed tasks is shown throughout.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- On version and patch pages, a running total of costs from completed tasks is shown throughout. Child patch costs are shown as part of the total. 
```

**Task-level fields:**

| Category | Subcategory      | Description                                                              |
| -------- | ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| EC2      |                  | Runtime cost with discounts applied                                      |
| EBS      | Throughput       | Cost above the 125 MB/s free tier, with discount applied                 |
| EBS      | Storage          | Cost for the attached volume, with discount applied                      |
| S3       | Artifact PUT     | PUT request cost for uploading user artifacts via the `s3.put` command   |
| S3       | Artifact storage | Storage cost for uploaded artifacts using S3 Intelligent Tiering pricing |
| S3       | Log PUT          | PUT request cost for uploading task logs                                 |
| S3       | Log storage      | Storage cost for uploaded logs over their retention period               |

All values reflect discounted costs. For field names and the full cost breakdown, see [How can I view cost data via the REST API?](#how-can-i-view-cost-data-via-the-rest-api).

**Version-level fields:**

> The version aggregates costs across all its tasks as they finish. For patch-triggered versions, child patches run as separate versions with their own independent cost tracking — see [Child patch costs](#child-patch-costs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Version-level fields:**

Versions aggregate costs across all its tasks as they finish. 

**Patch-level fields:**
Patches aggregate costs across all its tasks as they finish and also include [Child patch costs](#child-patch-costs).
```

## How is EC2 cost calculated?

EC2 is the machine that runs the task. The cost is calculated when the task finishes, using the task's actual runtime and the distro's pricing data.

The discounted cost blends a savings plan rate and the standard on-demand rate using a weighting factor:

```text
adjusted_cost = runtime_seconds * (finance_formula * savings_plan_rate + (1 - finance_formula) * on_demand_rate) / 3600
                                                                                                                   ^ EC2 rates are per-hour; divides to get per-second cost
```

> `finance_formula` is a ratio between 0 and 1 that controls how much of the cost is attributed to MongoDB's savings plan coverage versus the standard AWS list price. The savings plan rate and `finance_formula` are provided by the FP&A team. The on-demand rate is the standard AWS list price for the instance type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`finance_formula` is a ratio that controls how much of the cost is attributed to MongoDB's savings plan coverage versus the standard AWS list price. The savings plan rate and `finance_formula` are provided by the Financial Planning and Analysis (FP&A) team. The on-demand rate is the standard AWS list price for the instance type.
```

## How is EBS cost calculated?

EBS is the disk attached to the EC2 instance. Two components are tracked: throughput cost and storage cost. Both use us-east-1 rates regardless of where the task runs and are calculated when the task finishes.

### EBS throughput cost

GP3 volumes can be provisioned with higher throughput than the 125 MB/s AWS free tier. Only the throughput above that baseline is billable. If a distro has no GP3 mount points, or all volumes are at or below 125 MB/s, the throughput cost is zero.

```text
billable_throughput           = total_gp3_throughput_MBps - 125
adjusted_ebs_throughput_cost  = (billable_throughput * 0.04 / 2_592_000) * runtime_seconds * (1 - ebs_discount)

>                                                                ^ seconds in a 30-day month

Reviewer 2: lets do [this](https://github.com/evergreen-ci/evergreen/pull/10051#discussion_r3155193249) please

```

### EBS storage cost

Storage cost is based on the total size of all attached volumes, prorated to the task's actual runtime.

```text

> adjusted_ebs_storage_cost = (volume_size_GB * 0.08 / 2_592_000) * runtime_seconds * (1 - ebs_discount)

Reviewer 2: lets do [this](https://github.com/evergreen-ci/evergreen/pull/10051#discussion_r3155193249) please

adjusted_s3_log_put_cost = log_put_requests * s3_put_price * (1 - upload_cost_discount)
```

### Storage cost

Artifact and log storage both use S3 Intelligent Tiering pricing, which automatically places objects into tiers based on their access patterns. Storage cost is calculated when the task finishes, using each bucket's S3 expiration lifecycle rule to determine the retention period. To simplify the cost calculations, Evergreen starts counting tier days from the day the objects are uploaded.

| Tier              | Days  | Price per GB-month |
| ----------------- | ----- | ------------------ |
| Standard          | 0–30  | $0.023             |
| Infrequent Access | 30–90 | $0.0125            |
| Archive           | 90+   | $0.004             |

The retention period is read from the bucket's S3 expiration lifecycle rule. If no expiration rule is found, Evergreen falls back to a system default retention period. Separate discounts can be configured for each tier. Costs are only calculated for DevProd-owned buckets.

:::note

Buckets without lifecycle rules are monitored — bucket owners are notified to add one.

> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```
Let's not include that because we don't yet have a solid plan in place for this and we don't want users relying on it.

The `predicted_cost` field is returned on the task, version, and patch endpoints. On a version or patch, it represents the sum of predicted costs across all tasks. On patches, it also includes predicted costs for child patches.

Once tasks finish, the actual cost is calculated and stored separately. Predicted cost is not updated after tasks complete — it always reflects the pre-run estimate, not the final actual total.

## How can I view cost data via the REST API?

Cost fields are returned on the task, version, and patch endpoints. Discounted fields are prefixed `adjusted_` (for example, `adjusted_ec2_cost`). `on_demand_ec2_cost` is also returned as the undiscounted EC2 rate. EBS and S3 `on_demand_` equivalents are not returned by the API but are available in the Honeycomb cost breakdown.

**Task** — returns `task_cost` (discounted costs broken down by category) and `predicted_task_cost`. Also returns `s3_usage`, which contains the raw S3 upload metrics (PUT request counts and upload bytes) that Evergreen uses to calculate the S3 cost components in `task_cost`.

```text
GET https://evergreen.mongodb.com/rest/v2/tasks/{task_id}
```

> **Version** — returns `cost` (aggregated discounted cost across all tasks in the version), `predicted_cost`, and `s3_usage` (aggregated artifact and log upload metrics across all tasks). `cost` accumulates as tasks finish and reflects the total cost of all completed tasks so far. Child patch costs are not included — see [Child patch costs](#child-patch-costs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Version** — returns `cost` (aggregated discounted cost across all tasks in the version), `predicted_cost`, and `s3_usage` (aggregated artifact and log upload metrics across all tasks). `cost` accumulates as tasks finish and reflects the total cost of all completed tasks so far. Child patch costs are not included for version, please use the patch endpoint to see child patch costs. Please see [Child patch costs](#child-patch-costs) for more.
```

```text
GET https://evergreen.mongodb.com/rest/v2/versions/{version_id}
```

> **Patch** — returns `cost` (aggregated discounted cost for the patch's own tasks), `predicted_cost` (including child patch predicted costs), and `s3_usage` (aggregated artifact and log upload metrics for the patch's own tasks). Child patch actual costs and S3 usage are not rolled up — see [Child patch costs](#child-patch-costs) for how to aggregate them. The [patch](../Reference/Glossary#patch-build) ID and version ID are the same value — both endpoints accept the same ID and return the same cost total.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Patch** — returns `cost`, the aggregated discounted cost for the patch's own tasks as well as child patch costs, `predicted_cost` the aggregated predicted cost for the patch's own tasks as well as child patch costs. It also returns `s3_usage` which is the aggregated artifact and log upload metrics for the patch's own tasks, child patch s3 usage is not included. 
```

 Child patch actual costs are rolled up, example: https://evergreen.mongodb.com/rest/v2/patches/69efab9d892a6900077da022

```text
GET https://evergreen.mongodb.com/rest/v2/patches/{patch_id}
```

> ### Child patch costs

Reviewer 2: I think we should remove this section. All the details on what's included in each endpoint are already explained in the relevant section above, and the explanation of how child patches work are not really well suited for cost documentation. If we feel that users should have more information on the breakdown between versions and patches and how child patches play a role there, we should create a separate ticket for it and put it in a section focused on child patches.

> For patch-triggered builds that spawn child patches (for example, cross-repo PR patches), each child patch runs as a separate version. The REST API returns costs for each entity's own tasks only — child patch costs are **not** rolled up into the parent.

Reviewer 2: This is not true because the REST API does return the cost, just not for the /versions endpoint.
